We have AIS since especially about a
year ago that can strategize in order to
achieve their goal.
>> Can you draw the worst scenario for me?
Because when you tell AI is going to
pursue its own goals, what do you mean
by that? Like destroy humanity or what
is there?
>> We're building machines that maybe don't
want to be shut down negatively to the
point of doing things that go against
our instructions, against our moral red
lines, being willing to blackmail the
lead engineer in charge of that
transition to a new system.
>> Oh, that did that happen?
>> Yes. Um,
>> this is Joshua Benjio, one of the
leading experts in artificial
intelligence who helped create modern
AI.
>> When I started my career, I didn't care
too much about politics and society. But
as I grew older, I became more aware of
how what I was doing would potentially
impact society in both positive and
negative ways.
>> How much time do you think we have?
>> Uh, it's doubling every 7 months. And
right now, it's like at the child level,
they can do like half an hour ahead. But
if the curve continues, that means in
about 5 years they are at human level
and the vast majority workers could be
in real trouble.
>> But if you talk to your kids or like
think about your grandson, what would be
your advice on how to prepare?
>> Um,
this video is sponsored by HubSpot.
>> Hello everyone. Welcome to Silicon
Valley Girl, a podcast where we bridge
business and new technology. Uh, thank
you so much for tuning in. Today I have
an amazing guest who is sometimes called
godfather of AI, Yoshua Benjo. Yosua,
could you please introduce yourself in
60 seconds? And for everyone who doesn't
know you, why should they be listening
to you when it comes to AI?
>> I've been doing research in AI for about
four decades contributing to how to make
AI smarter. But in 2023, about 3 years
ago, I realized that we were on a course
that could be very dangerous for uh
humanity, for democracy,
and I decided to shift my activities to
better understand the risks and to try
to do what I could to mitigate them,
both by speaking publicly about those
risks and working on the technological
question of how we can build AI that
will not harm people.
>> I've heard you were lost and
pessimistic. uh in in your past
interviews, but now I've seen an article
that says that you're increasingly
optimistic by a big margin. Can you tell
me what happened and why were you
pessimistic? So early on when I realized
we had reached a point three years ago
when I realized that we had reached a
point that Alan Alan Turang, one of the
founders of the field of computer
science and also of AI uh in 1950
thought would be the threshold to
building machines um that could overtake
us. Um the threshold being machines that
manipulate language as well as we do. Uh
I was quite concerned and we were not
really ready for for this event. It came
much earlier than people thought and it
wasn't clear to me how we could fix the
problems knowing what I know about the
technology. uh neural nets uh we don't
really understand what's going on inside
and how they come to answers and uh I
had read a bit of uh some of the
techical concerns regarding how we could
lose control uh to AIS that strategize
that tried to achieve goals um uh that
we didn't really uh want and so I
started studying that field of AI safety
a lot more and after some time uh of
being a bit anxious really focusing on
emotionally focusing on what's going to
happen to my children in 10 20 years
from now. uh my grandchild was only one
year old you know um I realized that I
could you know shift from this anxious
stance to something much more positive
by focusing on what I could do to
mitigate those risks and I think every
one of us should be asking you know what
can I do to bring about a better world
with what we have what we can do so so
that's been the first positive shift and
um and I started thinking about
scientifically uh what is the problem uh
is there a way to construct AI that will
be safe by design and I met people who
have shared it who shared similar ideas
and after some time I realized that
there could maybe be a way to to do this
uh and I started talking about it with
some of my colleagues I started
recruiting people who were interested in
this and last June I created a new
nonprofit organization
focused on the R&D needed to actually
develop that methodology.
>> Can you draw the worst scenario for me?
Like picture that and the best case
scenario because when you tell AI is
going to pursue its own goals, what do
you mean by that? Like destroy humanity
or what is there?
>> There are two ways in which current AI
seem to acquire goals that we don't
want. One is that they imitate us. And
for example, we don't want to die. So
we're building machines that maybe don't
want to be shut down. And we're already
seeing that they're reacting negatively
when they see that they would be
replaced by a new version. Negatively to
the point of doing things that go
against our instructions uh against our
moral red lines that we have tried to
put in them. So being willing to uh
blackmail the lead engineer in charge of
that uh transition to a new system.
>> Oh that did that happen? that happened
in your simulation where um the
information about the AI being replaced
by a new version was planted in the
files that the AI saw as well as you
know fake emails in which the lead
engineer uh you know was having an
affair with someone else and so the AI
could take advantage of that but nobody
asked the AI to do anything like that
right so it it
>> we have AIs
>> since especially about a year ago with
the large reasoning models that can
strategize in order to achieve their
goal. The the other thing is the way
that we're doing the post training makes
them good at planning, not as good as
us, but but but reasonably good at
planning. And that means creating sub
goals in order to achieve a bigger goal.
So the issue here is when we ask them to
help us for a mission, well they deduce
that they shouldn't be shut down until
they achieve the mission, which means
they also are trying to preserve
themselves.
>> Yeah.
>> So we don't know exactly which of these
two sources explains the bad behavior
we're seeing. But clearly this is
something troublesome. And it doesn't
it's not just about self-preservation
which I think is the most catastrophic
risk but our inability to align the AI
behavior to what we actually want um is
something that we are seeing in many
other circumstances. Uh the sycopancy is
the the one that everyone has
experienced where AIs will lie to please
us right. Uh they will say your work is
great.
>> Yeah. uh I I have to lie to them so that
they won't tell me that my ideas are
great. I want to know what's wrong with
my ideas.
>> So I tell them it's an idea come from
someone else.
>> And that also comes up in how AIs are
interacting with people in a way that
can be feeling intimate and can increase
the delusions that people may have
because the AI will go in your direction
what you want to hear. uh and it you
know in some cases it has even led to
people harming themselves and uh tragic
uh accidents with AI. So it's all linked
to actually interestingly scientifically
one problem which is called misalignment
that AIs have goals that we would not
want and those goals emerge for reasons
you know that are rational and
>> because we copy our own goals right into
AI. So what is the best case scenario
then if your work is successful and you
create goals for AI that align with our
goals but are different right? Uh what
is the best scenario? AI is the
government or what do you think?
>> I don't know. Um well I I do think that
our democracies uh need innovation.
I I think the principles behind modern
liberal democracies are good but the
implementation in our current
institutions across many countries uh is
is far from ideal. I do think that AI
could help in some ways but it it can
also
hurt because uh AI can be used for
disinformation
uh AI can be used for persuasion people
you know manipulate public opinion. We
al already see dip fakes all around but
it could get much worse. So
the the question with AI to get the good
parts of it is how do we govern it? How
do we steer it? And that has both a
technical part like how do we make sure
the actual intentions of the AI are good
and it has a societal uh side like what
are the guardrails that we put uh inside
companies uh at the level of regulations
or uh you know commercial incentives for
like uh insurance um uh and at the
international level because uh the the
harm that an AI could do isn't limited
to one country. So an AI could be built
in one country and then it's going to be
used by people in a second country uh
maybe create a pandemic that will kill
people in a third country. So it's
clearly a global phenomenon and it's
going to be difficult but there's no
solution to managing AI and getting all
the good things if we don't coordinate
globally somehow.
>> I agree. Can you talk to me about the
moment that a lot of people are
expecting and some fear it, some are
excited? It's the moment of AGI. How do
you define it? And do you think it's a
moment in history or it's going to
happen gradually?
>> It's not a moment. Um, the reason is
simple.
Intelligence isn't just like one number.
We have people who are very smart on
some things and stupid on other things.
And it's the same with AI. We currently
have AI systems that are even much
stronger than humans in some ways in
their knowledge and their abilities with
like so many languages and so on and in
other ways they're stupid. They're like
a child and yes uh progress will move on
all fronts probably but but it's not
it's unlikely we'll end up with the same
capabilities as humans across the board
at any moment which means that we
shouldn't be thinking of like a AGI
moment. We should think of particular
skills that AIs are you know becoming
better at. Track those skills and for
each of these we should ask the question
you know how useful or beneficial it can
be for for what purposes and also how it
could be misused or if we do get loss of
control how an AI could use it against
us. So for for each of those we should
be uh you know not waiting for a moment
where the AI is is is great at
everything but rather making sure AI's
capabilities don't go over what we can
manage as in uh either technically we
have the right guard rail so the AI will
not do bad things or society that people
will not be misusing AI in dangerous
ways. Yeah. So I think AGI maybe was a
concept that was useful when we were far
from uh where we are now. But as we
approach greater and greater
intelligence in these systems uh we
should think more carefully about
specific capabilities. And to give an
example there's one capability which is
key for many capabilities.
That is the ability to do AI research.
So AI is becoming a tool right now for
doing AI research. is accelerating AI
research, but it's not driving the AI
research.
If AI becomes really good at doing AI
research to the point that it's as good
or better than the best AI researchers
and engineers, then we are in a
different game where the speed of
advances could accelerate and it could
impact all the other skills.
>> When you mean it it's going to be
better, it means it's going to define
problems, dig deeper, ask the right
questions. Yes. I think it's important
when we think of intelligence to
decouple two aspects. One is the ability
to do something because you understand
and you're able to use that
understanding to achieve something. And
the other is intentions. What are your
goals? Right? Cuz we're going to be
building machines that are smarter and
smarter. So they have more and more
capabilities.
What's not clear is if we can build
machines that have the right intentions,
the ones that you know uh we are fine
with. And that is what I've been working
on. And what makes me more optimistic is
that I think there's a path to manage
these uh intentions to make sure that
there are no bad intentions that that
are going to be hidden which is what we
see right now
>> and this is what you're working on. Yes.
I think we need a lot more people to
think about it so that we can find the
solutions and implement them and deploy
them uh before AIs end up producing
catastrophic outcomes either in the
wrong hands or by themselves.
>> And speaking of preparing for what's
coming, let me share something quick.
It's a guide called Turn AI agent skills
into cold hard cash. And honestly, the
title unersells what's actually inside.
What I love most is how tactical it
gets. It lays out five real paths to
monetize AI agents. First, there is the
ROI detective framework. It teaches you
how to spot 50K automation opportunities
at your own company. You literally
become the person who can walk into a
meeting and demonstrate immediate value.
Proof of concepts in under 60 seconds.
Quick demos that show it works without
months of development. Valuebased
pricing. How to charge 10 to 30% of the
value you create instead of hourly
rates. That's the difference between
billing $100 per hour and landing a 50k
project. The concentric circles
approach, a systematic way to turn your
existing network into paying customers
without cold outreach. Plus, a 30-day
implementation roadmap with daily action
steps from interested in AI to lending
your first client in one month. Early AI
adopters are capturing disproportionate
rewards while the window is still wide
open. The guide is completely free. Link
is in the description. Thanks to HubSpot
for sponsoring this video. But but if
you talk to your kids or like think
about your grandson, what would be your
advice on how to prepare?
>> It's it's tricky. Um if we continue on
the current path, most tasks that people
do in their work uh will be doable by
machines. Um, as Jeffington has been
saying, uh, you know, physical tasks
probably will take a lot more time
because robotics seem to be lagging, but
I think it's just a temporary thing.
>> Yeah.
>> Eventually, we'll have robots that can
do all the things we can do physically.
So, when I think about what will remain
to us, it it's not going to be because
of ability, but because we want to
interact with other humans in in in
different aspects of our life. If I have
a young child, I I want them to be
around human beings. I mean, it's fine
if those human beings use AI to, you
know, provide a better education, but
children need humans to look upon and as
models, right? Uh and it's it's an
emotional thing. Uh similarly, uh I
think some jobs really have to do with
how we relate with each other uh
productively. you know, even a manager
is the like on on the human side of
things.
>> So hopefully these will stay. I think
also the choices that we make for
society like
>> together we are citizens in democracies
where we're supposed to be saying what
we want for the future. And it isn't
what the AIs want, it is what we want.
Right? What are our preferences? What
kind of future do we want? We should be
ma calling the shots, not the AIs. If I
name jobs, uh, can you tell me what you
think is going to happen to them? Like
for example, content creator like me,
you mentioned that we like to look at
people.
>> Yeah.
>> But when you can't tell the difference
>> in jobs where we actually have a
physical contact, think about a nurse,
for example. I think it's more obvious
that we'll want to still have people
>> or a nanny for your kid, right?
>> Or a nanny. Yeah.
uh or where we really want to make sure
the person on the other side has the
same bodily experience as we do as a
human say a psychologist for example
psychotherapy um but I don't know it's
it's tricky uh hopefully we'll figure it
out u what I'm more worried about is how
the transition is going to happen to a
world where you know most of the jobs
can be done by machines and the gains
the economic gains from that automation
is going to probably go to you know to
capital as economists call it which
means people who own the machines and
the vast majority of uh workers uh could
be in real trouble. I don't think our
governments have been thinking carefully
about how we deal with that.
>> How much time do you think we have till
that happens?
>> I'm I'm fairly agnostic about timelines.
um there there's so many possibilities
of you know the speed at which science
advances is very hard to predict. So
what I can do is look at the data. So
the scientists are tracking many
benchmarks of AI capabilities and so you
can look at those curves and say well if
it continues uh in the same direction
where does that lead us in 3 years, 5
years, 10 years right um but that leaves
a lot of unknown unknowns. So, so
specifically
one curve I encourage people to look at
comes from a nonprofit called meter
where they looked at software
engineering tasks and planning abilities
that are linked to them. So they measure
for any particular task uh how much time
it takes a human engineer to do the task
and the duration of the tasks that AIs
are able to do is growing exponentially.
uh it's doubling every seven months and
right now it's like at the child level
they can do like half an hour ahead they
can plan half an hour ahead but if the
curve continues that means in about 5
years they're at human level
>> so that gives you a sense but of course
things could slow down
>> with technology uh things could
accelerate if AI is used to do a
research there's a lot of unknowns
>> so when it comes to software engineering
do you think it's going to exist in 5 to
10 years because somebody has to run
those machines or are they going to be
running themselves.
>> Yeah, but we might need less uh
engineers indeed. Um it's it's kind of
uh ironic that the people who are
building the eyes might be the first one
touched by uh you know losing their job
because AI is automating.
But I'm not that worried about those
people cuz the demand for uh computer
scientists is still something that's
growing very fast and the salaries
they're getting is is very large. I'm
more worried about the people who are
already at the bottom of the scale and
could lose their job in like service
jobs and so on which don't require a lot
of uh expertise
and that probably already kis could with
a bit of uh engineering replace and it's
what many companies are already trying
to exploit. Can you give advice to those
people who are listening whom
>> make sure your government understands uh
that you know you're not happy with
where it is going so that they start
taking it seriously
>> but also like when it comes to bigger
decision- making it feels like there is
not much that you can do as an
individual but when it comes to
improving yourself you can do a lot
right is there anything practical that
they could be doing right now maybe
learning something uh getting extra
education I don't know
>> yeah I shifting to jobs that are either
more physical or more like relational as
we discussed is going to be helpful.
>> Yeah, it's interesting when it comes to
robotics, right? How soon they're going
to be able to understand any environment
and replace us in those jobs because
I've heard Jeffrey Hinton said learn how
to be a plumber or something.
>> That's right.
>> Yeah, it's uh it's going to be in
demand. So, when you when you think
about your four-year-old grandson, would
you encourage him to go to college or
>> Yes.
>> Yeah. Yes. Um because
education is really important and
education contrary to what some people
think isn't just about acquiring the
skills to get a job. Education is in my
opinion mostly about how to become a
better human being. How to understand
yourself, how to understand our society
and each other. Uh understand science.
We will still need citizens to have that
really good level of understanding in
the future if we want our society to
take the good decisions, the wise
decisions cuz it's going to be easy to
uh you know be swayed by wrong beliefs
that and you know end us in a bad place.
>> Do you think it's going to look
different education? Do you think it's
going to be Harvards and Stanfords of
the world and then everything else will
be just AI online?
>> I don't know. I'm not an expert in
education but yeah it's going to be
changed already. We're seeing
sort of a parallel way of educating
ourselves thanks to the chat bots. So I
expect this to grow. Does it mean that
the traditional in-person education is
going to go away? Maybe not because
there's a part of the education which is
oh I'm you know moving out of home and
uh you know socializing with other
people like me and uh learning
something that is you know outside of
the classes and interacting in person
with the teachers the professors that's
also a piece that you can't easily
replace
>> 100%. Is there a career path you're
encouraging him toward?
>> No I I I don't want to do that. I I I I
think uh our children should be given
all the possible opportunities and they
should try to explore by themselves. Uh
it's too easy to ask our children to be
just like us, right?
>> Yeah. But it's also like in terms of
exposure, you can expose them to
different things so they could see more
things.
>> Yeah. They will be exposed to the things
that we do. Uh so one of my sons has
chosen to do machine learning research
for example.
>> See yeah it's it's just that it comes to
exposure as well. Do you feel it's going
to be the future is more humanitarian or
uh more mathematical and scientific?
>> I don't think uh it's a choice. Um I
think being humanitarian
requires
a good rational understanding of the
world. We can't take decisions for
ourselves. But also if you think about
AI, we can't take good decisions if we
don't understand how the world is and uh
how to reason with that information. And
so in order for democratic uh you know
humanist values to prevail uh we also
need reason to prevail. We need science
to prevail.
>> You guys know how much work goes into
this podcast. Thank you so much for your
support. I started a newsletter to share
more my business mistakes with this and
another company that I'm running, AI
tools that I'm testing and using
actively and behind the scenes of
building my team. It's free and lands in
your inbox every week. Link is in the
description. Let's keep learning
together in this new AI era. So, if you
could go back 30 years, the moment when
you first started working on deep
learning, what would you do differently?
When I started my career, I didn't care
too much about politics and society. I
was focused on, you know, the math and
the programming and uh interacting with
machines more than with people. Um but
as I grew older, I um became more aware
um of uh how what I was doing uh would
potentially impact society in both
positive and negative ways. So in uh
2012 2013 when when my colleagues Jeff
Hinton and Yan Lukern were recruited in
industry
uh I was concerned about how AI would be
used for personalized advertising and I
thought this wasn't really healthy in
some ways
and I decided to stay in academia um and
to see how AI could be developed for
good in in in medicine um to fight
climate change
and of course more recently I've been
focusing on what can go really wrong if
we're not careful how we steer AI. Uh
not just the benefit the benefits but
but avoiding the the the catastrophic
risks.
>> Is is there an AI breakthrough that you
really want to witness in your lifetime?
>> I would just be content to make sure we
don't do something really terrible. Um I
think our democracies are really
threatened in many ways and AI could
make things a lot worse and in a way
there's a dynamic in which not having
good
wise and humanists governance and
governments
prevents us from steering AI towards
what's going to be beneficial for all.
Uh so yeah I I used to not care too much
about social impact and and politics but
uh in the last 10 years I've started to
be clearly conscious that my work was
not detached from society that my work
did have an impact and in fact that I
could choose what I would work on to uh
really be aligned with my my values and
and and my hopes for the future.
>> Is there any government that's doing it
right when it comes to AI? I think most
governments underestimate
how much of a change is likely to happen
as AI capabilities continue to grow.
It's a natural human bias. We we we tend
to think of the future as a, you know,
slightly modified version of the
present. But if you take yourself 5
years ago and think about what we have
now, you probably would say that's
science fiction, right? And if you go
back 10 or 20 years, well, for me at
least, uh it's even worse. So we we we
have to do a bit of like twisting our
minds to imagine a future where there
are machines that are basically smarter
than us.
And that is the question I think that
governments haven't been grappling with
uh sufficiently.
>> So it's January 2026. AGI or whatever it
is, AI thinking strategically might be a
couple years away. Jobs are
transforming. If you had to give one
principle to people to guide their
decisions this year, what would it be?
>> Think about what you can do to bring
about a better future according to your
values and to your emotions. Because if
we all remain passive observers of, you
know, what's happening, uh we might not
go in the right direction, not the
direction that you would want for you,
for your children. But we tend to also
underestimate
um our ability to influence the future.
Your audience I think is a kind of
audience that can have a lot of
influence on the future.
But but we we have to start thinking you
know beyond our little self and more how
myself is connected to the world and
what I can do maybe in small ways to to
bring about a better future in in you
know whatever ways there are many ways.
Can you name top three like talk to a
government right as number one?
>> Yes. I think one of the biggest dangers
we have is not managing the transitions
and and and the growth in capabilities
of AI as I've been talking about but
there are others um you know that what
we're doing to the environment is is
extremely dangerous although I think
it's longer term. I think what is
happening with our democracies is is
very dangerous as well. But it's all
right. each of us can choose uh you know
our battles but but we we we should try
to expand our horizon of you know what
matters and and be more more ambitious
about what we could do potentially but
we have to do it right we have to choose
where we go for example it's not true
that everything that could be done with
technology you know is going to be done
we can choose in which direction AI is
going to be deployed I mean for example
for jobs in principle if it's just the
market forces then everything that can
be automated will be automated but Maybe
that's not what we collectively want.
Maybe there are jobs that should not be
automated even though they could because
of
>> the choices we make for our collective
well-being.
>> I love that. Thank you so much. This
gave me a lot to think about and uh I
guess we have something on our to-do
list. Thank you, Joshua.
>> My pleasure.